The goal of precision oncology is to select more effective treatments or beneficial drugs for patients, and more and more hidden responders can be identified with the rapidly development genome matching targeted therapies. Recently, a RAS pathway activation detection method based on machine learning and a nature-inspired deep RAS activation pan-cancer has been proposed. However, we note that a severe imbalance between tumor wild-type and RAS mutant-type, which will affect the accuracy of predicting tumor type. Based on their research, we developed the Deep Ensemble RAS Activated Pan-Cancer (DERAP) model to detect the activity of the pan-cancer RAS pathway in this study. We first collected data from the PanCanAltas project on 33 different cancer types, including RNA sequencing, copy number and mutation data, then used an unsupervised method to analyze the RNA-seq data of different cancer types, and detected the activity of RAS pathway activation based on deep ensemble model eventually. Besides dealing with the severe imbalance between tumor wild-type and RAS mutant-type, we also conducted multiple experiments on 33 different cancer types across PanCanAtlas. The experimental results show that our proposed DERAP can obtain competitive performance over other state-of-the-art methods in diagnosing RAS aberrant pathway activity across different cancer types. In addition, we further revealed the identification and characterization of RAS aberrant pathway activity through gene ontological enrichment and pathological analysis.
